---
author: Bircan Erbas, Muhammad Akram, Dorota M Gertig, Dallas English, John L Hopper, Anne M Kavanagh, Rob&nbsp;J&nbsp;Hyndman
Status: Published
comments: false
date: 2010-02-05 23:14:26+00:00
slug: brca-usew
title: Using functional data analysis models to estimate future time trends of age-specific
  breast cancer mortality for the United States and England-Wales
wordpress_id: 724
kind:
 article
tags:
- demography
- epidemiology
- functional data
- time series
citation: "<em>Journal of Epidemiology</em> <b>20</b>(2), 159-165"
doi: 10.2188/jea.JE20090072
---


**Background:** Mortality/incidence predictions are used for planning public health resources and need to accurately reflect age-related changes through time. We present a new forecasting model to estimate future trends in age-related breast cancer mortality for the United States and England-Wales.

**Material and methods:** We use functional data analysis techniques to model breast cancer mortality-age relationships in the United States from 1950 to 2001 and England-Wales from 1950 to 2003, and estimate 20-year predictions using a new forecasting method.

**Results:** In the United States, trends for women aged 45–54 years continued to decline since 1980. In contrast, trends in women aged 60 - 84 years increased in the 1980s and declined in the 1990s. For England-Wales, trends for women aged 45 to 74 years slightly increased prior to 1980, but declined thereafter. The greatest age-related changes for both countries were during the 1990s. For both the United States and England-Wales, trends are expected to decline and then stabilize with the greatest decline in women aged 60 - 70 years. Forecasts suggest relatively stable trends for women over 75 years.

**Conclusions:** Predicting age related changes in mortality/incidence can be used for planning and targeting programs for specific age groups. Currently, these models are being extended to incorporate other variables that may influence age-related changes in mortality/incidence trends. In their current form, these models will be most useful for modelling and projecting future trends of diseases where there has been very little advancement in treatment and minimal cohort effects such as lethal cancers.

**Key words:** breast cancer, forecasting, functional-data-analysis models, mortality trends

