---
title: Handgun acquisitions in California after two mass shootings
author: David&nbsp;M&nbsp;Studdert, Yifan&nbsp;Zhang, Jonathan&nbsp;A&nbsp;Rodden, Rob&nbsp;J&nbsp;Hyndman, Garen&nbsp;J&nbsp;Wintemute
kind: article
citation: <em>Annals of Internal Medicine</em>, 166(10), 698-706
date: 2017-05-02
slug: handguns
doi: 10.7326/M16-1574
---

### Background

Mass shootings are common in the United States. They are the most visible form of firearm violence. Their effect on personal decisions to purchase firearms is not well understood.

### Objective

To determine changes in handgun acquisition patterns after the mass shootings in Newtown, Connecticut, in 2012 and San Bernardino, California, in 2015.

### Design

Time-series analysis using seasonal autoregressive integrated moving-average (SARIMA) models.

### Setting

California.

### Population

Adults who acquired handguns between 2007 and 2016.

### Measurements

Excess handgun acquisitions (defined as the difference between actual and expected acquisitions) in the 6-week and 12-week periods after each shooting, overall and within subgroups of acquirers.

### Results

In the 6 weeks after the Newtown and San Bernardino shootings, there were 25 705 (95% prediction interval, 17 411 to 32 788) and 27 413 (prediction interval, 15 188 to 37 734) excess acquisitions, respectively, representing increases of 53% (95% CI, 30% to 80%) and 41% (CI, 19% to 68%) over expected volume. Large increases in acquisitions occurred among white and Hispanic persons, but not among black persons, and among persons with no record of having previously acquired a handgun. After the San Bernardino shootings, acquisition rates increased by 85% among residents of that city and adjacent neighborhoods, compared with 35% elsewhere in California.

### Limitations

The data relate to handguns in 1 state. The statistical analysis cannot establish causality.

### Conclusion

Large increases in handgun acquisitions occurred after these 2 mass shootings. The spikes were short-lived and accounted for less than 10% of annual handgun acquisitions statewide. Further research should examine whether repeated shocks of this kind lead to substantial increases in the prevalence of firearm ownership.

* * *

For six months from 2 May 2017, a toll-free paper is available [here](http://annals.org/article.aspx?articleId=2624284&guestAccessKey=f80a7e60-5a77-4dec-ba00-a1ede175b0e2).

An associated editorial is [also available](http://annals.org/article.aspx?articleId=2624992&guestAccessKey=7904b26f-52ef-4735-9a34-0cfdb8a3db37) under the same terms.
