---
author: robjhyndman
comments: true
date: 2014-04-07 22:36:23+00:00

link: https://robjhyndman.com/hyndsight/cos-job/
slug: cos-job
title: Job at Center for Open Science
wordpress_id: 2655
categories:
- jobs
- R
- reproducible research
- statistics
---

This looks like an interesting job.


>Dear Dr. Hyndman,

>I write from the Center for Open Science, a non-profit organization based in Charlottesville, Virginia in the United States, which is dedicated to improving the alignment between scientific values and scientific practices. We are dedicated to open source and open science.

>We are reaching out to you to find out if you know anyone who might be interested in our Statistical and Methodological Consultant position.

>The position is a unique opportunity to consult on reproducible best practices in data analysis and research design; the consultant will make shorts visits to provide lectures and training at universities, laboratories, conferences, and through virtual mediums. An especially unique part of the job involves collaborating with the White House's Office of Science and Technology Policy on matters relating to reproducibility.

>If you know someone with substantial training and experience in scientific research, quantitative methods, reproducible research practices, and some programming experience (at least R, ideally Python or Julia) might you please pass this along to them?

>Anyone may find out more about the job or apply via our website:

>[http://centerforopenscience.org/jobs/#stats](http://centerforopenscience.org/jobs/#stats)

>The position is full-time and located at our office in beautiful Charlottesville, VA. 

>Thanks in advance for your time and help.

